---
title: prose.io + ProWritingAid
categories: English
tags:
  - github pages
  - grammar
maths: 1
comments_id: null
published: true
---
## Editing suggestions, prose.io + prowritingaid works!

Some time ago, I wrote a post on this blog, about random numbers and philosophy with my favourite editor: gvim. When using this nice editor, it is rather difficult to spot the little spelling mistakes, in particular before the markdown text has been compiled.
I also made some syntax error where I used "too much + adverb" (while the correct version was "too + adverb"). For these reasons I was trying to use one of those nice services like [Grammarly](www.grammarly.com) in order to improve my prose... 

During this process, I found a useful service for managing the markdown posts for Github pages called:

- [prose.io](prose.io)

to use it, you just need to grant access to your page, and it allows helps manage posts, save them, commit ecc.

Unfortunatelly, Google Chrome extensions like Grammarly do not work properly with `prose.io`, i.e. they do not underline the mistakes or provide any suggestion. One needs to copy and paste the post on supported applications, correct the text and copy it back on the post. This, of course, is rather annoying.
At this point I tried many other options including:

- [webpage spell-check](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/webpage-spell-check/mgdhaoimpabdhmacaclbbjddhngchjik), this works with `prose.io` but it simply underlines the typos (no suggestions of any kind)
- [ProWritingAid](https://prowritingaid.com/en/App/ChromeExtension) this one is similar to grammarly but it does not work with `prose.io`

No single extension to Chrome I found provided both undelying and suggestions.

However, I found a tricky solution, by combining the two aforementioned products:
When you turn on the "spell check" option of `webpage spell-check` everything becomes "editable".
The cursor becomes like the one you use when entering text, even in webpages where there is no editable content. Actually it is kind of annoying since you cannot "click" on links! 

However if you use it in conjunction with `prowritingaid` it allows this latter to access the text of the posts you are editing with `prose.io`: at this point you get underlined typos and the suggestions. 

This solution is not perfect:

- It often suggests to put a period if you wrap a line arbitarily although the sentence is not over
- It takes a few seconds for the spell checks and suggestions to appear.
- The suggestions can disappear magically, for example if you change Windoes desktop. At this point you need to turn off and on again the spell check of `webpage spell-check` (maybe a couple of times).
- It is slow to edit the text when the suggestions are on! however, a click allows one to replace the old statement with the suggestion, making it easy. 
- Sometimes you use the suggested correction, but it disappears afterwards!

### In summary: 

In order to use `prose.io` with writing suggestions one needs to:
- install `webpage spell check` on Chrome
- install `prowritingaid` on Chrome (and turn it on for the website `prose.io`)
- enter `prose.io` (you need to give permission to access to your Github Pages site).
- **disable** the spell check of `webpage spell check` (left click on the icon on Chrome, it is the bottom option)
- enter in the dir containing the `_posts` and select the desired one.
- turn **on** the spell check of `webpage spell check` and wait a few seconds, at this point the suggestions by ProWritingAid will appear under the text and by left-clicking on the underlined words one gets the suggestions, and the possibility to replace the text!
